Apptainer hpc docs (#28585)
idaholab/moose: modules/doc/content/getting_started/installation/inl_hpc_install_moose.md

# INL HPC Cluster

The following instructions are for those operating on [!ac](INL) [!ac](HPC) machines. This includes
Bitterroot, Lemhi, and Sawtooth. It also includes the protected access hosts `rod` and `cone`.

Requesting access to [!ac](INL) [!ac](HPC) is handled by the [NCRC](https://inl.gov/ncrc/) group.

For information on running pre-built MOOSE-based NCRC applications (not the scope of this
document), please see [NCRC Applications](help/inl/applications.md) instead, and choose the
application applicable to you.

## Containerization

The development environment is deployed using containerization, which is a deployment
practice that bundles all application (i.e., MOOSE or a MOOSE-based app) dependencies need to run
on any host. This means that applications built within this environment can be executed

> across all INL HPC clusters. That is, you can build an application within a compute node on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across all INL HPC clusters. For example, you can build an application within a compute node on
```

> Sawtooth at INL and execute the same application (providing you follow the instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sawtooth and execute the same executable of the application (providing you follow the instructions
```

> that follow) on both Bitterroot and Lemhi, in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that follow) on both Bitterroot and Lemhi.
```

## Versioning id=versioning

The version of the dependencies used within MOOSE (PETSc, libMesh, etc) are tied directly
to a given version of MOOSE. Given a version of MOOSE (typically a Git commit hash), we produce
a version of the development environment that contains the correct version of these dependencies.
Whenever you are compiling MOOSE or a MOOSE-based application, you should use the corresponding
version of the development environment.

In order to determine the version of the development environment to use when building, run the
following within the MOOSE directory:

```bash
./scripts/versioner.py moose-dev
```

where the output will be a hashed version:

!versioner! code
__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
!versioner-end!

In this case, the version of `moose-dev` that should be used is [!versioner!version package=moose-dev].
For most applications in which a MOOSE submodule is used, you will commonly excute:

!versioner! code
./moose/scripts/versioner.py moose-dev
!versioner-end!

> Note that this version will change in time as MOOSE changes, or if you use an older version of MOOSE.

Reviewer: I would add explanation on what is the default version of `moose-dev-openmpi`. I guess it is safe if the default version can compile an application without an issue since moose has been tested against applications. I feel asking users to specify the version number can be an advanced feature.

Author: > I guess it is safe if the default version can compile an application without an issue since moose has been tested against applications

This isn't necessarily the case, which is why I'm so explicit that you should use versions here. I don't want to suggest to users that they should use the default, because when we change the default (happens weekly), it will likely break their install. Just like updating conda would.

I do agree that including information on openmpi is good idea. I plan on going into this further in a later PR. Including a section on mpich

on HPC. We have two different methods of execution that we will reference later:

- Shell: Enters an interactive shell within the container where you can run multiple commands within the environment, can only be used on a single host
- Execute: Runs a single command within the container, required for running on multiple hosts

When running on a single host (i.e., not in a HPC job), enter the container in a shell as
done above and execute your application as normal:

!versioner! code
module load use.moose moose-dev-openmpi/__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
moose-dev-shell
mpiexec -n 2 /path/to/your/application-opt -i ...
!versioner-end!

When you are running on multiple hosts (i.e., in a HPC job) you must used the "execute"
method to run your application as described above. This is done by appending the command
`moose-dev-exec` before the path to the binary of your application. That is, within a HPC
job submission script or within a HPC job interactive session, you will run your application
with:

!versioner! code
module load use.moose moose-dev-openmpi/__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
mpiexec -n 2 moose-dev-exec /path/to/your/application-opt -i ...
!versioner-end!

> Note that the "execute" method will also work on a single host.

Reviewer: Maybe want to add comments on why OpenMPI is chosen, how if users want to change MPI package, how if users want to do profiling, etc.

# INL HPC Cluster

The following instructions are for those operating on [!ac](INL) [!ac](HPC) machines. This includes
Bitterroot, Lemhi, and Sawtooth. It also includes the protected access hosts `rod` and `cone`.

Requesting access to [!ac](INL) [!ac](HPC) is handled by the [NCRC](https://inl.gov/ncrc/) group.

For information on running pre-built MOOSE-based NCRC applications (not the scope of this
document), please see [NCRC Applications](help/inl/applications.md) instead, and choose the
application applicable to you.

## Containerization

> The development environment is deployed using containerization, which is a deployment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!style halign=left
The development environment is deployed using containerization, which is a deployment
```
Like we talked about, and everywhere else this should be added. Or, of course, if you have a global CSS fix, that would be fantastic too.

a version of the development environment that contains the correct version of these dependencies.
Whenever you are compiling MOOSE or a MOOSE-based application, you should use the corresponding
version of the development environment.

In order to determine the version of the development environment to use when building, run the
following within the MOOSE directory:

```bash
./scripts/versioner.py moose-dev
```

where the output will be a hashed version:

!versioner! code
__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
!versioner-end!

In this case, the version of that should be used is [!versioner!version package=moose-dev].
This is the version that should be used for loading the containerized environment module that
follows.

## Loading the Environment

To access all MOOSE related modules, you must first load the `use.moose` module. The development
container modules are then located within the `moose-dev-MPI` modules, where `MPI` denotes the variant
of MPI is used. The version of these `moose-dev-MPI` modules used are the versions described by
the versioner script explained in the [#versioning] section. Currently, the only deployed variant is

> `openmpi`, i.e. the development container modulethat should be used is `moose-dev-openmpi`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`openmpi`, i.e. the development container module that should be used is `moose-dev-openmpi`.
```

> With this, the containeried development environment is loaded with the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this, the containerized development environment is loaded with the following:
```

development from the fast-paced development of MOOSE, you should use specific module versions.

## Building id=building

The containerized environment needs to be entered in order to build or execute. For the purposes
of this documentation, we will use the version [!versioner!version package=moose-dev], although
yours could be different!

To enter the containerized shell environment to proceed with building, run the following
(note that here we are requesting the specific version of the environment that we need):

!versioner! code
module load use.moose moose-dev-openmpi/__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
moose-dev-shell
!versioner-end!

You are now within the versioned, containerized environment. The standard
MOOSE dependencies (PETSc, libMesh, WASP, etc) are built and there is not a need to run
any of the update-and-rebuild scripts within MOOSE. You +must+ repeat the commands
above whenever you build any code.

At this point, we have assumed that you already have the source code for your application
available and are in the directory that contains that application. Build your application
and test it as normal:

```

> make -j 6
> ./run_tests -j 6

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make -j 4
./run_tests -j 4
```
😢

```

## Running id=running

How your application is ran is dependent on whether or not you are running across multiple
hosts. In general, you are running across multiple hosts when you are running within a job
on HPC. We have two different methods of execution that we will reference later:

- Shell: Enters an interactive shell within the container where you can run multiple commands within the environment, can only be used on a single host
- Execute: Runs a single command within the container, required for running on multiple hosts

When running on a single host (i.e., not in a HPC job), enter the container in a shell as
done above and execute your application as normal:

!versioner! code
module load use.moose moose-dev-openmpi/__VERSIONER_VERSION_MOOSE_DEV__
moose-dev-shell
mpiexec -n 2 /path/to/your/application-opt -i ...
!versioner-end!

> When you are running on multiple hosts (i.e., in a HPC job) you must use the "execute"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you are running on multiple hosts (i.e., in an HPC job) you must use the "execute"
```

method to run your application as described above. This is done by appending the command

> `moose-dev-exec` before the path to the binary of your application. That is, within a HPC

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`moose-dev-exec` before the path to the binary of your application. That is, within an HPC
```

> job submission script or within a HPC job interactive session, you will run your application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
job submission script or within an HPC job interactive session, you will run your application
```
